During his earthly ministry,
Jesus expelled demons.
He healed the sick.
He fed multitudes.
He even raised the dead.
But was he known
as the Great Demon-Expeller,
the Great Healer,
the Great Feeder-of-Multitudes,
or the Great Resurrector?
No.
But he was known as the Great Teacher.
Why?
Because he primarily focused his efforts
on the preaching and teaching work.
But now, why did he do this?
Well, he knew physical miracles
would only bring temporary benefits.
He knew ones freed from the demons,
ones that were healed, fed,
and even resurrected
would eventually grow old and die.
So how could he help people permanently?
Well, he knew he could only do it
by teaching them the life-saving knowledge
about his Father, Jehovah.
He well knew the truthfulness
of what he stated as recorded at John 17:3:
‘This means everlasting life,
‘their coming to know you, the only true God,
and the one He sent, Jesus Christ.’
So even though he did many amazing things,
he focused primarily
on the preaching and teaching work,
becoming the greatest Teacher
ever to walk this earth.
In fact,
when officers were sent to arrest him,
do you remember what happened?
They came back empty-handed.
Why?
Well, they said:
“Never has any man spoken like this.”
They were so awestruck by his teaching,
they couldn’t even
bring themselves to arrest him.
Large crowds would stick with him for days,
even without eating
in order to listen to his teaching.
In contrast
to the quality of Jesus’ teaching,
Acts chapter 20
tells us about the apostle Paul
giving a long, long talk.
And during that talk, you’ll remember
that the young man Eutychus
sank into a deep, deep sleep
and even fell out of the third-story window
of a building.
Now, of course, Paul resurrected him,
but probably he felt responsible
for putting him to sleep like that.
But, no offense to Paul,
I’m sure he was doing the best he could.
But, obviously, his teaching
was not on a par
with that of the Great Teacher.
And that makes me think of what
a brother said to me in a teasing way.
He said: “Brother Lett,
I always look forward to your talks.
I know
I’m going to wake up totally refreshed.”
Well, it’s really true that none of us,
like Paul,
can begin to match
the quality of teaching of the Great Teacher.
But what are we told at 1 Peter 2:21?
We are told “to follow his steps closely.”
We can’t do it perfectly,
but we’re told to do it as closely as we can.
So that means all of us.
But especially as we’re talking to you,
dear Gilead students, soon-to-be-graduates,
you must make
the preaching and teaching work
a priority.
And we must do our best
and you must do your best
to improve in your teaching.
And how can you do that?
By imitating the Great Teacher.
During this talk
(even though much of what we will talk about
will concern the public ministry),
what we’re going to discuss (much of it)
would be applicable
to teaching on a personal level
and in the congregation.
So especially you brothers (but all of us),
want to imitate Jesus’ teaching methods
as we shepherd Jehovah’s sheep
on a personal level
and as we do so on a congregational level
from the platform.
Now, here’s a question:
How did Jesus become the Great Teacher?
Well, the Bible tells us
that for aeons and aeons of time,
as “a master worker” beside Jehovah,
he carefully observed
and he imitated his Father.
And he thereby acquired
amazing teaching skills.
He learned from the greatest Teacher.
And no wonder he became the Great Teacher.
He learned from his heavenly Father,
and he appropriately gave credit
where it belongs.
Go to John chapter 8, please,
and notice how he gave the credit for his
speaking and teaching where it belongs.
John 8 and the B  part of verse 28:
“I do nothing of my own initiative;
“but just as the Father taught me,
I speak these things.”
Yes, he imitated his Father.
Now we want to imitate him.
But what specific teaching methods
did he utilize and did he learn
from the greatest Teacher?
Well, let’s discuss four.
Now, one, he taught with enthusiasm
and conviction.
Matthew 7:29:
“For he was teaching them
“as a person having authority,
and not as their scribes.”
So doesn’t that indicate
enthusiasm, conviction,
and authority is what he taught?
So if we’re not enthusiastic
about what we teach
in the ministry or from the platform,
how could we expect our listeners
to be enthusiastic about it?
So never would we want
to come across halfhearted in our teaching.
Just like enthusiastic teaching
is contagious,
halfhearted teaching
is contagious too, isn’t it?
You could perhaps liken it to yawning.
One person yawns in a room,
and pretty soon everybody is yawning.
And that could be the way
with halfhearted teaching.
But as a caution, we don’t want to be
theatrical in our speaking.
That means
we wouldn’t want to use extreme gestures
or dramatic expressions
—overly theatrical or even theatrical.
Why?
Because now you end up drawing
attention to yourself
—don’t you?—
rather than to what you’re teaching.
And that’s emphasis in the wrong place,
isn’t it?
But now let’s talk about a second method
the Great Teacher utilized.
He was a good listener.
Where did he learn this pattern
of being a good listener?
Well, open up to Isaiah chapter 50, please,
and notice what is prophetically said
about Jesus
and where he learned to be a good listener.
Notice in chapter 50
and right at the end of verse 4.
Let’s begin there: “He [Jehovah]
“awakens my ear to listen
“like the taught ones.
“The Sovereign Lord Jehovah
has opened my ear,
“and I was not rebellious.
I did not turn in the opposite direction.”
So Jehovah opened his ear,
trained him to be a good listener,
and he responded well, did he not?
And that’s why when he became a human,
from childhood on,
he continued his pattern
of being a good listener, didn’t he?
Do you recall the account in Luke chapter 2
when Joseph and Mary finally found Jesus
after three days
when he was only 12 years old?
Where did they find him?
It says that he was “sitting in the midst
of the teachers” there in the temple
and listening to them
and then also asking them questions.
Then when he began his career
as a disciple-maker at age 30,
it was second nature—wasn’t it?—
to be a good listener.
Now, think of this:
Even though he had more to say
than any other human has ever had to say,
he knew the value of pausing,
drawing out his audience,
and then really listening to them.
And the same is true with us.
You may think especially after Gilead School
that you’ve got a lot to say.
But if we’re going to imitate
the Great Teacher,
we have to use self-control.
We have to pause and draw people out
and then really listen to them.
And when we serve as an assistant,
which sometimes is half the time,
we want to be active listeners.
What does that mean
(to be an active listener)?
Well, maybe
you would nod periodically in agreement.
Or maybe you would add some little comment,
such as, “Well, that’s very interesting.”
You might even ask for clarification.
People like to clarify what they’re saying.
It shows you’re really interested
in what’s happening.
So whether we’re the one presenting
or the one who is an assistant,
we want to be an active listener.
There’s probably nothing more distracting
than having your assistant
playing with the dog
or maybe looking down the street
to see what’s happening down the street.
Pretty soon, your householder is looking down
the street to see what’s happening.
Be an active listener.
Well, let’s get our third method
the Great Teacher used.
He used thought-provoking questions.
And methods two and three do go hand in hand
—don’t they?—
because if you ask good questions,
you’re likely
going to have more to listen to.
But what if some of Jehovah’s people
tend to shy away,
perhaps, from using questions?
What if they just like to present information
and kind of control everything?
Well, if you think about it, it’s probably
easier just to present information
even though it’s not nearly as effective.
When you ask questions
and then you get a response
from the householder,
it’s kind of like bouncing a football.
Now, when you bounce a basketball, it’s
predictable—isn’t it?—but not a football.
And it’s the same way with people.
They come back with all kinds of responses,
and you’ve got to be willing and able
to adapt according to their responses.
Some don’t like that uncertainty, so they
would rather just present information.
But as we said,
that’s not going to be nearly as effective
as those who have learned
to imitate the Great Teacher
and effectively teach with questions.
Now, you Gilead students
have certainly seen the value
of good questions during class.
It made it so much more enjoyable
—didn’t it?—
and it enhanced your learning tremendously
when your instructors
used these good questions.
Why is that more effective,
to proficiently use questions?
Well, for one thing,
you involve your listener
in the conversation.
And what do you enjoy more?
Being given a sermon
or being involved in a conversation?
The answer is obvious, isn’t it?
So involve the listener.
It’s more enjoyable.
Another thing is that you gain
valuable information about your listener,
which you can use to really help that one.
Well, what are types of questions we can use?
You can use “what do you think” questions.
Jesus used them.
As an example, Matthew 18:12:
“What do you think?
If a man has 100 sheep
and one of them strays . . . ”
—we know the rest of the illustration.
But he started out with: “What do you think?”
And people generally
like to give their opinion
and, in a sense, there’s no wrong answer
—is there?—
because whatever they say,
that’s what they think.
That’s what you asked for, right?
You asked, “What do you think?”
And people like to give their opinion.
It makes it enjoyable.
You can also use multiple-choice questions.
That sometimes makes it easier
for the householder to answer.
Jesus gave an example in Matthew 17:25.
He said: “[Simon,]
from whom do the kings of the earth
“receive duties or head tax?
From their sons or from the strangers?”
Many of our tracts use multiple-choice
questions—don’t they?—
and we can effectively use those.
And if you think about it, the right question
can often enable us
to overcome potential conversation stoppers
and keep the conversation going.
For example, if a person says,
“You people don’t believe in Jesus,”
we might say: “Well, may I please ask,
why do you say that?
Did someone tell you that about us?”
Harmless questions
can keep that conversation going
until you get valuable information
that perhaps you can use to help the person.
A person says,
“I don’t believe in the Bible.”
“May I please ask why you feel that way?
May I ask how long you have felt that way?”
Keep it going.
One brother said that during pioneer school
he had those questions drilled into his head:
“Why do you feel that way?
How long have you felt that way?”
A woman came to the door and said,
“I can’t talk; I’m pregnant.”
And he said, “Well, may I ask
how long you’ve felt that way?”
Don’t do that.
Like we said before,
you’ve got to be a good listener.
But then what about using
thought-provoking questions
when conducting a Bible study?
As you well know, our new study book
is loaded with thought-provoking questions
—isn’t it?—
and we certainly want to fully utilize them.
But occasionally
we may need to add auxiliary questions.
But remember, most of what
a good teacher says during a Bible study
is in the form of questions.
I know for myself,
I’ve really tried hard to train myself
when I’m about ready to make a statement,
say something.
‘Wait a minute; let me change that.
‘Let me change it to a question,
and let me draw out from the student
what I was about to say.’
That’s going to be more effective, isn’t it?
It’s normally much better
than explaining a scripture
to a student to have
the student explain it to you.
And don’t be afraid of a little silence.
If you ask a question and there is silence,
some of us think that we have to quickly fill
in the gap by saying something.
But if they’re thinking, let them think.
Of course, you have to know your student.
If they have no clue what the answer is,
then don’t let them
just sit there and sizzle.
Throw them a rope.
Throw them an auxiliary question.
But now we’re going
to go to our fourth method
that the Great Teacher learned
from the greatest Teacher:
He effectively used illustrations.
And that was certainly
a powerful teaching tool indeed.
Matthew 13:34:
“Without an illustration
[Jesus] would not speak.”
But here’s a question:
Do you think that Jesus’ illustrations
were the product
of spur-of-the-moment thinking?
Well, there’s no doubt about it
that his perfect brain certainly helped
to be able to come up
with amazing illustrations.
But nevertheless, the indication is
that he cultivated the ability
to effectively use illustrations.
If he saw a shepherd, for example,
taking care of his sheep,
he likely meditated,
‘Now, how can I use this situation
to teach vital truths?’
He did the same when he saw, for example,
a fisherman letting down his nets,
a farmer sowing seed,
or maybe builders constructing a tower.
‘How can I use this
to make powerful illustrations
that teach vital truths?’
Even with simple items
like birds, lilies, a lamp on a lampstand,
a wineskin, leaven, a mustard seed,
salt, the young child
he thought, ‘How can I use these simple items
to teach vital truths?’
And it was amazing how he did that.
And the same is true with us.
All around us, if we train ourselves
to think that way,
there are circumstances,
there are situations,
there are even items that we can use
and make them into powerful illustrations.
And we can powerfully elevate
the quality of our teaching.
Now, here’s an example.
Some time ago,
a brother noticed a little baby
with a pacifier.
This pacifier had been dipped in sugar water
and put in the baby’s mouth.
And he was thinking:
‘You know, that’s a very good illustration
‘of many, many in Christendom.
‘They’re satisfied with what they have,
‘even though they have
no real spiritual nourishment.
‘But we’re looking for those
who are not satisfied,
those who are conscious
of their spiritual need.’
And he was able to use that in a talk.
What are cautions
regarding the use of illustrations?
Well, here are just a couple.
An illustration
should not be too long or complicated.
If it is, simplify it or discard it.
That’s what the School Guidebook  tells us.
Here’s another caution: To be effective,
the illustration must be familiar to
and fit your audience.
For example,
what if you used the illustration
that Satan’s system is like a male platypus?
Now, in some parts of Australia,
that might be a good illustration
because they know a male platypus
looks harmless, he looks innocent,
but his hind legs are armed with ankle spurs
connected to venom glands.
So he looks harmless,
but he could be very dangerous.
But that only works if you’re dealing
with people that are familiar
with that particular animal.
But skillfully selected and used,
illustrations are very effective.
They stimulate thinking,
they arrest and hold attention,
they motivate the heart and conscience
of our listener,
and they serve as powerful memory aids.
A good illustration
is going to be remembered years later
along with (and this is the important thing)
a point that it was designed to highlight.
Well, there we have four teaching methods
utilized by the Great Teacher
that he learned from the greatest Teacher,
as we said.
And we want to do our best to copy,
or imitate, his way of teaching.
And I know you Gilead students
have an enhanced desire to do that
in the congregation
and also in your territory
that you’re going to be working in.
So let’s work hard
to teach with enthusiasm and conviction,
let’s be a good listener,
let’s use thought-provoking questions,
and let’s use effective illustrations.
If you work hard,
you dear students, almost graduates,
to employ these same teaching techniques,
then you’re going to be a lot more skillful
in reaching the hearts of your listeners.
And there’s a lot at stake, isn’t it?
I mean, if you think about it, the lives
of our brothers and sisters are at stake.
And with the “art of teaching”
learned from the Great Teacher,
we want to help as many of them as we can
to make it into that new world.
And then also the lives of honesthearted ones
in our territory
hang in the balance, don’t they?
So we want to find them before it’s too late.
And using the art of teaching
learned from the Great Teacher,
we want to motivate them
to come into the safety
of Jehovah’s organization.
And if you think about it,
it’s good to remember
that what we’re doing now
in the way of learning to teach
is really preparing us
for the greatest teaching campaign
ever in all human history
—the teaching of billions
who will be coming back in the resurrection.
You could say our work now
is like a warm-up, isn’t it?
It’s a warm-up
for that greatest teaching campaign
that is just around the corner.
So please continue to observe carefully
the teaching of the Great Teacher,
and you learned a lot about that in school,
no doubt about it.
And may Jehovah continue
to bless you most beloved
Gilead students, almost graduates.
May he bless you as you apply
all the wonderful things
you’ve learned during this school,
and that includes learning
to imitate the Great Teacher.